I'm often invited to give lectures, but they're usually just one event, so I focus on that.
But it can take quite a while because, of course, one wants to focus one's thoughts in a very condensed way, and then there's a sense, too, that one wants it to be
as good as possible, so there's a lot of revision involved.
If it's okay, I'll start talking a little bit about the book, and if we don't really get into the book itself, please understand that I'm writing a feature, and I really believe that books speak eloquently on their own merits, and it's presumptuous of me to ask you specific things about the novel.
Inevitably, of course, we probably will talk about the novel, but I am interested in writing
I'll just shut this up.
Let me say, I know you've done this many times in the past, but it does... I am really awestruck by the way in which you can assume the voice of a man and really pull it off so convincingly.
Apparently, I'm not intimidated at all about really writing and creating from these footprints.
from the perspective of a male character?
No, I think I understand certain kinds of men very well.
Also, I feel deep sympathy and identification with many men.
I think issues of gender are probably not that relevant.
I can understand certain individual men better than I can understand certain individual women, and the same is true for men.
theory of gender is quite as impermeable as some people think.
What interested me about this particular novel was the phenomenon, as I see it, of how a person creates his own personality, or how we invent selves as we grow older.
We have a child's
that may be the natural self.
And then around adolescence, we start to create another self with which we confront our peers.
And Corky Corcoran in the novel is one of these characters who might have become very introverted, very angry at the world, very depressed and morbid, but he takes a different turn.
He becomes extroverted
He gets involved in sports in high school.
He's seeking after the popular boys and becomes friends with them.
And he's kind of a sunny, funny, cheerful kid on the outside.
And whatever is on the inside, he keeps hidden until when we see him at the age of 42, and he is almost completely this other person.
a handshaker and a backslapper.
He's very well loved by some people.
He's involved in city politics in the city, something like Buffalo.
He's a democratic councilman.
Something like Buffalo.
Something like Buffalo, yeah.
He's the kind of person whom we meet.
We see a person like this come into a room and other people look around and their faces light up because he's got a lot of jokes and he brings energy to it.
an event, he shakes people's hands, you know, and women like him because he likes women and men like him.
And I wanted to explore what might be inside a person like that, who in some ways is antithetical to myself, because I am rather introverted and rather quiet and analytical, but the extroverted personality seems to be quintessentially American, very related to other people.
and wanting to be popular.
That seems to me a very American value.
I think so.
And you mentioned also the city, Union City, a lot like Buffalo.
I remember doing an interview with Ruth Rendell, a year or so ago.
Oh, really?
Yeah, she came through, and we were talking about British fiction, English fiction in America.
And she said that one thing that made us heard about American novels is how
how critically important Place is.
Oh, yeah.
And she said this about her book.
She said, you could take this book right here, whichever one it was, and you could just put it anywhere.
Place really wasn't so essential, she thought.
That's the kind of writing that she does.
But Iris Murdoch, for instance, is so saturated in Place.
Iris Murdoch has a novel that's all about the underground among them.
Exactly.
There are other English writers, certainly of the early 20th century, like D.H.
Lawrence and Thomas Hardy, who are very saturated in plays.
Hardy especially.
So you wouldn't necessarily accept that?
Well, Ruth Render does a certain kind of novel that's more like a concept novel, problem novel.
She's just a wonderful suspense mystery novel.
And the mystery is a concept.
It's as if we had a puzzle on the table.
and you were laying out the jigsaw puzzle pieces, and you could take the whole thing, I suppose, and put it over in some other area.
But those of us who are very much related to a region or a country, I identify with America very much, are really writing out of a sense of something more organic and integral, where the people whom we write about are of their place and their time.
This book is impossible without Irish Hill, I mean.
Yes, right, Irish-American.
Right, really.
Yes, a sense of being victimized, which sometimes is true, and sometimes it's just what they're saying, you know, a bit of blarning.
And you have to know that when an Irish person says something, it may or may not be uttered in absolute truth.
Much of what is said is playful.
It's like music or poetry.
It isn't meant to be taken absolutely literally.
When Corky, for instance, says these awful things about women or thinks these awful things about women, those are not 100% himself.
That's a fleeting moment in his life.
And some people have isolated things that Corky said.
or thought out of the 600 pages of the novel as if this stood for him.
But certainly the whole Irish sensibility is very playful, and I don't mean insincere, but there is a sense of that language inhabits its own sphere.
the idea of the scheme here, where you decided to really write about a character who you said was just maybe 180 degrees different from yourself.
Yes.
Did you have the story in mind, or was it, do you start with a concept of this character?
I'm wondering how you really pointed to this weekend, for instance, here, in which everything seems to reveal itself.
Well, to be absolutely honest, the origins of
of long works I think are shrouded in mystery.
And I remember waking up one morning some years ago feeling such a sense of excitement and elation that I was going to write a novel about a man who would be very different from myself and he would be representative of a certain kind of masculinity, very macho, but also very well-liked, a kind of popular man.
a man who has lots of friends, a type I've never written about before.
And I was very excited, I can remember that.
Strange sense of elation that lasted for hours.
But at that point I didn't have the story, and I didn't really have Corky.
Then a little later I thought, well I'll write about an Irish-American male.
I've never written about that particular type before.
I'm descended from Irish-Americans, partly on the other side of my family.
My mother's side is Hungarian.
And I've written a lot about middle European people, that is, you know, the descendants.
But I've never really done very much with the Irish-American strings, and to me that was very exciting.
So it's corkiest based on some men I know.
Very fleetingly, an uncle of mine.
Did you hear the voice before you had the, you said, before you knew who he was?
Well, I always, as soon as I thought I'd write about an Irish-American, I always knew who Corky was, and I always knew him.
The trouble, the difficulty for me as a novelist is to find the narrative voice, so I have to experiment with my narrative voice.
I always knew what Corky sounded like.
I could write pages and pages of him talking.
I always do that when I'm starting a novel.
I just have my characters talk, and they talk and explain themselves, and they get in scenes with other characters.
The stories that I write arise from the characters, just as the stories in our lives tend to arise from our characters.
And I don't really write about random things.
I mean, in real life, you and I,
can have random experiences.
We could leave this hotel and be struck by a car.
It has no integral relationship to our lives.
But in a novel, everything arises from character.
So as soon as you have a character, you know what's going to happen.
When Corky learns that a young woman seems to have committed suicide, he is not the kind of person who will be incurious about it.
He's going to find out more about it.
He's very inquisitive.
And as he says a couple of times, he should have been a cop.
He should have been an Irish cop because he has this restless sense of wanting to know more.
He's always asking questions.
Now, another man would have let it go, would have been sorry for the fact that this young woman died, but wouldn't have done anything about it.
Whereas for four days, Corky's driving around town, trying to ferret out information, makes telephone calls.
He's getting deeper and deeper into trouble because the people who are responsible for this young woman's killing herself are always aware of what he's doing.
They know what he's doing, and he should know better, but he can't help them.
And he gets deeper and deeper into what he sees to be some sort of a scheme or a plot or a conspiracy.
The reader always knows a little more what of course he's doing than he knows.
You really needed that contracted period, too, didn't you?
Yeah, everything coming together.
To give it that tension, even.
Yeah.
It couldn't really be spread out over a period of time.
You really did have to focus it, I think.
Again, this came through the process of writing the novel.
I mean, you didn't really have this online, so to speak.
Oh, yes, I always had the online.
Do you?
Oh, I knew it would just be four days around Memorial Day.
It had to end.
It ends on Memorial Day for symbolic reasons.
But you learn later on in the novel, the center of Corky's emotional life, which is related to his mother.
And it's the short chapter called The Kiss, where we see what Corky's mother was like when he was 11 years old, or I think he's 12 years old.
And why he's so fascinated by women
And he's so susceptible to women, but he can't be faithful to any one woman because he's pursuing this elusive chimera.
His own mother was so mysterious, a very beautiful and schizophrenic woman who died young.
So he's always pursuing this elusive image of a woman.
And I think that's how people are.
Did you also...
That opening scene, of course, is gripping.
I mean, if you want to grab a reader, you do it quite, quite powerfully with that scene of the wreath out in front of the house.
Again, you started with Corky now.
Now you had to build his life around him, didn't you?
Right, around there.
And then you had to have this very important scene, you know, but you had to have that right away to get to kind of
to see why everything follows from there.
What kind of a boy would he have been if his father had lived?
Not the boy, and then not the man he does become.
And that line, you're the only witness, you know.
The only witness, but he can't lie.
He didn't really see the car.
But the police wanted him to.
But I've been in situations like that where I almost have seen something
And, oh, I almost remember something.
Or my husband and I were almost seeing something.
But your eyes could even be on something, but you haven't seen it.
And so he can't lie.
That's the one legacy of his father.
He just can't lie.
Now somebody else might have lied.
Because, in fact, it wasn't that much of a lie.
It wasn't that much of a stretch to identify the car.
But he couldn't lie.
You aren't intimidated at all about, I mean, picking up the jargon, the talk of a guy like this.
Oh, man.
Yeah.
Well, no.
It's not phony at all.
I have to say, I'm an old Navy guy.
Oh, my God.
And there's really nothing, there's really nothing gratuitous about the language, and you really, where do you go?
How do you get this kind of... Well, as a writer, I'm very interested in how people talk, and I see American idiom as very beautiful, and the profanities and obscenities and the kind of weird metaphors and figures of speech that people use is really a kind of poetry.
People may be offended by it, but if you look at black English, for instance, black English,
meeting with African-American people.
Right, African-American is really so poetic.
And that language has so many tropes and similes and metaphors and witty conjunctions of words.
And some of them are profane and some of them are obscene.
But a lot of them are really right on target.
A lot of them have to do with white people.
So you look at this language and you think, this is really an incredibly beautiful, complicated, brilliant sub-language.
It's not exactly English.
It's African-American English.
And there's a whole jargon of men talking to other men.
And they don't talk that way usually when women are around or they don't talk that way to women.
And that too is often very funny.
very witty, seemingly vulgar and crude, but the men are communicating.
And the function of language is communicating.
But it's something a little different.
So for me to work in Corky's idiomatic voice, which is very macho, and someone might say exaggerating, that was very exhilarating because it was as if I were exploring a language.
that's not my own, and that people don't speak in principle.
It's like I went on a journey.
And so, I mean, I know how people do talk to some extent.
I've also written a novel called Because It Is Bittering, Because It Is My Heart, that has a lot of black talk in it.
These are black people.
And there's a white family and a black family, and I sort of contrast that language.
Anyway, for me as a writer, language is just so exciting.
So the whole natural language I find is just wonderful.
How do you acquire it?
I mean, living in a lovely little village like Princeton or wherever, I mean, I think.
Well, one, I mean, one.
I mean, John, for instance, has really bemoaned the fact that, I mean, he's, I think he's almost as prolific as you are in terms of output.
Oh, yeah, definitely.
But he's bemoaned that he really doesn't get out and see the real world as much as he might.
He could.
I go to New York a lot.
I have lots of friends.
I'm involved in this theater.
I'm teasing just a little bit now.
I know John.
He's a friend and we correspond a bit.
But John does what he wants to do, basically, and he has a readership that
and a constituency that likes what he does very much.
So he's writing about a sort of upper middle class Caucasian world and those are the people who buy his books.
If he were to be writing about something very different, he'd have to be a little stretch or a little prowling about his readership.
I don't have any problem with trying to write for a certain readership because I don't think I have any.
Stable readership.
I have no idea who reads my books.
I'm also surprised.
You mentioned constituency.
That was your work for John.
Do you have a sense of what your constituency is?
My novels are so different.
I have a book on boxing, which has its own little life.
There are people who read my book on boxing.
who don't even read books.
I mean, boxing, actually boxing.
A very good friend of mine wrote a biography of Joaquin Marciano about 20 years ago, and he's familiar with your book on boxing.
This is another example of the masculine world.
My father took me to boxing matches when I was an old girl, and my father loved boxing.
He had a good friend who was a professional middleweight out of Buffalo.
who never got anywhere.
In fact, he was injured in the ring.
So for me, boxing is the sport that typifies masculinity, much more than football or baseball, because boxing was the sport of my childhood and my girlhood.
And there's a whole world there and a language there, and boxers are very witty.
Mike Tyson, for instance, was, or maybe he still is, a very funny person.
In a group of people, Mike was funny.
He'd make jokes.
He was witty.
Now, that doesn't come through in his public persona.
He's branded now forever as a rapist and God knows what.
As I had to say from Tyson, there was always this sense of menace.
Maybe that contributed to the, maybe there was a surprise for McNuma, but, you know, being around Tyson.
No.
Really?
You know, I went out to dinner with Mike and with his manager.
No, that is sort of PR.
Really?
Now, if you met Mike in a different venue, you weren't in a midtown restaurant with him and his trainer, his manager, his co-manager, and his wife.
I mean, if you met Mike when he was in another state, for instance, if you met Mike in a boxing ring and he's coming at you, he's a different person because he's a professional boxer.
And people shouldn't be surprised that a professional boxer, heavyweight champion of the world, is medicine.
Of course, he's deadly.
He's like a killer.
So is Jack Dempsey.
But you take these people out of that professional ring and they're often very different.
But the thing about Mike Tyson and about other Baptists whom I met is how smart they are.
Their reputations for not being smart, very smart.
I mean, look at Muhammad Ali.
He was so sharp.
He was fun.
He was playful.
A lot of playfulness there.
There was a piece in the New York Times a week or so ago, and somebody went to Madonna's, the woman, the entertainer,
her Manhattan apartment.
Probably the place is lined with boxing photographs inscribed, and there's one from Ali.
Really?
Yeah, if I can find the piece, I'll send it to you.
It was terrific.
I missed that.
It was a big, big piece in the New York Times.
And then she had allowed the New York Times correspondent to come in, which is kind of unusual.
But her favorite was the inscribed picture from Ali for Madonna, where both
the greatest.
We are the greatest.
And they asked her, this is a great quote, what is it about boxing that you enjoy?
And she says, the violence.
The controlled violence.
I don't even know what she called it, control.
I understand, but I think she really likes this, maybe it was even the other side, I mean, uncontrolled, the actual, you know, it's
It's competition taking, reduced to its basis the most basic elements, I guess.
I love boxing.
Well, I love it too, but right now it's actually wonderful, isn't it?
It's terrible.
There was a fight on a couple months ago.
I called my father.
He's 84.
It was a fixed fight.
It was terrible.
It was this heavyweight fight that when I went down, it had to be fixed.
When I was a kid, he wasn't a real...
He wasn't real heavy, but he was small.
Yeah.
We could talk boxing all day.
But Raffi Marciano is another example of someone who was small.
Yeah, but he was a lot like Mike Tyson.
He had this total killer instinct.
That's right, but he wasn't as good a boxer as Mike.
Mike had a really good defense, and Marciano didn't have a good defense.
Marciano was basically a savage.
Yeah, he was like Jack Dempsey.
But when Mike Tyson was training seriously, he was a very sharp, defensive boxer.
He was very, very defensive.
Then he lost it all.
He fired his trainers, you know, Kevin Rooney.
He became a different kind of boxer, I think much less interesting.
Some of this boxing stuff will get into my piece.
Oh, it's fine.
But don't you think it's just part of this interest in the masculine world, which has its own poetry, and I can see that it's a world different from my own.
See, I'm interested in people, not myself.
I feel I'm like a reporter or anthropologist.
Some people get interested in birds, and they travel around the world.
I have a friend who looks at rare birds and loves them and takes photographs, and I feel that way about human beings.
I read in a—in fact, I read it last night again—the interview you did with Paris Review back in, I guess, was 70— Quite a while ago.
I guess it was 78, and you were living up in Canada at that time.
You were asked a couple questions.
There was one novel, I guess, Wonderland, where you actually went back and rewrote the ending of it.
The ending, yeah.
Just coincidentally, I did an interview with Kim O'Brien a couple weeks ago, moved that around.
He, for instance, said that even though 15 years after he had won the National Book Award for going after Cacciato, he actually went in and rewrote parts of it.
I mean, the paperback that is out there right now is different.
He said he gets letters from teachers all the time.
He goes, hey, I'm using one book and the students do another.
And I just, I know Henry James did like to, he couldn't keep his hands up and stuff.
And his prefaces to the New York edition, for instance, are just wonderful.
But while he was doing this, he did go in and gorby dallas, tinker a little bit.
How do you feel about a finished work being a finished work?
I mean, do you really think that it does represent your,
your self as a writer at a particular point in your life and do you really feel that you should ever go back and tinker with things or do you feel on the other hand as O'Brien says I have an obligation to make the most beautiful work that I can you know I don't know it's just a general question well it's interesting about Tim O'Brien I teach the
The Things They Carried.
It's the long short story.
Let me just interrupt and say, he said that now that this book is done, he's going to go back and fool around with that one again.
The Things They Carried.
Oh, The Things They Carried.
I just was wondering whether he had altered that.
He said he's about to alter that.
Well, it's very beautiful, but if he puts more in it, that might make it better.
I think the writers have to do what they...
compelled to do, and that we already have some sense of being driven by inner and partly unconscious forces.
It's the way in which people fall in love, let's say, and there are cycles in our lives where we become intensely interested and have dreams about an earlier period of our lives.
Maybe we're 20 years old, maybe we're 30 years old, maybe we're dreaming about when we're 14, and I don't know why this comes up again and again,
So I suppose with writers, there are works that inhabit their past that are living and vivid, and they start thinking about that, and now they feel that they could write it a little better.
I often rewrite a short story completely after it's been published in a magazine.
I mean, you're getting it ready for a collection.
Getting it ready for a collection.
It's different, I think.
It's different.
Maybe it's not, I'm just saying.
But I think, I would think that's different.
It's different.
If you're taking a story that you did for a magazine and now, because in a collection, I know that you particularly like to have the stories, a certain theme for the stories.
And so, you know, maybe it is necessary to make some alterations.
I think that's different.
I'm sorry to interrupt you.
It is different.
It's different in a way.
If there's a continuum, it's on that continuum, but it's at an extreme, obviously.
But to rewrite a published book is more of a commitment, obviously, and many people have done it.
And sometimes it's a good idea, sometimes it may not be.
My friend Toni Morrison insists that she's going to be rewriting The Bluest Eye.
And I said to Toni, please don't, because it's a beautiful novel.
She's not going to listen to me.
She's got her own inner voice.
Now, why do you think that is?
And this is not for my story, but I'm just curious.
Because writers are stubborn.
Toni's stubborn.
She has her own inner voice.
If she wants to rewrite her first novel, she's going to do it.
She's not going to listen to other people.
When I rewrote the ending of Wonderland, it was a very raw and somewhat crude
inchoate part of my life where I was having many emotions and going through an emotional turbulence that I don't have now.
So the original ending for Wonderland had seemed like the inevitable ending, but then some months later I believed that I understood the real ending and why this was.
I don't know.
My publishers are very
sympathetic and very patient with me.
But with a novel like What I Lived For, written in a more mature time, one might say I would never let it go out of the house until I was absolutely certain that I'd finished it.
And when I was a younger writer, I didn't have that perspective.
I might finish a novel and send it off to my publisher within a month.
But now I keep the work around much longer, maybe six months.
You said in this interview, and I wonder if this is still the way you work, you will finish a novel, put it away, go to work on something else, perhaps some stories or another novel, and then go back.
Back and back.
Is this still the procedure that you've done?
Oh, yeah.
To me, that's very comfortable.
Because once I get out of the novel and into another consciousness,
and then go back to it, I have much more critical detachment.
And then you had said also, pardon me for bringing up the old, I am interested in craft.
You actually had started, I mean, you talk about going in a different direction.
I guess in your earlier years, you used to write on a typewriter, and then you changed over to handwritten manuscripts.
I wonder now, have you entered the word processor generation?
No, I don't use a word processor.
I sit and write by long hand.
I was working on a poem this morning.
I like to write with my own handwriting.
All of what I lived for was in handwriting.
Really?
But in a kind of informal way, like a piece of paper that are folded over, and I write that way.
But to me, it's just a comfortable way of writing.
I had a word processor for two years, and I became so
obsessed with it and I was working much longer than I should have every day, sometimes past midnight.
I was fascinated by the screen and staring and mesmerized and I thought I don't want to live the rest of my life being hypnotized by the screen, staring at a screen for 12 hours of a day.
So I got rid of the word processor and now I look out the window again and I write in longhand and I have a
a nice typewriter.
It's a very handsome, state-of-the-art typewriter.
So then I typed, but I can look out the window.
To me that's very important.
There was a study, I'm told about the study, Joe Finder told me about it, at Harvard or MIT.
Apparently, and I believe this because I write entirely on a word process, and I see my stuff every week, so I see how it looks in print, and I also see how it looks on a screen.
And I also see, and I print it out, and so I see how it looks on the manuscript page.
And it looks different, and it reads differently, and I think it impacts people differently.
And there have been studies which apparently validate this, that what you write on a screen, you really can't.
I know Dr. Roble, I interviewed earlier this summer for the new novel.
He writes in the word processing, but he prints it out.
And he said he has to do the editing on the page because it's different.
It's totally different from the way it looks on the screen, and you're saying different things.
It is interesting how language comes to you.
The words can be the same, but the effect, the impact will be totally different just by the medium to which you can get it.
So true, so true, and also the type thought.
The thought is so important, isn't it?
The quality of the pages.
If there's an elegant font and handsome paper, it makes a big difference.
I don't know what the number.
I could have counted them, I guess, but do you have a count of how many books that you have now?
Well, books and titles are somewhat different because some of the titles refer to novellas or even short stories that have been special auditions, so it's hard to have a count.
A library may have 95 items in that.
But some of them are just short stories that are special editions.
That's why a quantitative figure is misleading.
Twenty-four novels.
Amazing.
Some of them are short.
Some of them are very short.
I'm sure you are inevitably asked the question, how is it that you can possibly maintain this kind of a fate?
Well, I love writing, I love language, and as I said, you know, I get fascinated by people.
So for me it's excitement and pleasure.
And there's never a, there's no shortage of ideas, apparently.
No, no, I have many, many more ideas.
I have so many outlines and sketches for novels and short stories I'll never live to write.
You mentioned correctly that Updike,
That's just an example, but he does tend to write about a certain white middle class.
Generally, except for Brazil.
Brazil, which is a little different.
A little different.
Tim O'Brien, to name another, writes five out of six books that all had Vietnam themes.
But you, on the other hand, cover the waterfront, so to speak.
I guess what I'm asking is,
Do you see your work as a corpus?
Probably, I think so.
I always read about things that I've experienced emotionally.
It was Goethe who said he'd never written about anything he hadn't experienced.
I suppose he meant by that he hadn't experienced in some emotional way.
We've all had experiences of love and betrayal and losing someone whom we love to death.
We don't necessarily have to write about ourselves, our own experiences.
We can give those experiences to fictitious people, and I think that's what writers do, or some writers anyway.
Obviously for Tim O'Brien, the Vietnam War came at a time in his young manhood, when he was just out of college, and anything at that time would have been so vivid and powerful to him.
And then added to that the trauma of the war, so that's the most
dynamic part of his life.
He said, and I really challenged him on this, and I pushed him on it, and he said, this is the last book I'm going to write.
I'm not writing anymore.
I said, I don't believe it.
I mean, he's gone through some personal, which he outlined in the New York Times.
I know, I read that.
Which I was a little disappointed to see that.
I mean, there were certain things that you'd like to see people resolve in their own without having to
But in any case, let me talk a little bit about that.
But he did say, this is the best book.
He said, I'm not capable of writing a better book than this.
And I said, you're a young guy.
You're younger than I am.
I said, I have to believe that you're going through something that you're going to deal with.
and that you're going to come back to this.
And he said, well, maybe 15 years from now I'll change my mind.
But he said, I don't know what to write about.
And I quoted him on that, and that's quite a startling thing to say.
I'm not asking you to comment on O'Brien.
I'll comment on Tim O'Brien.
One day Tim O'Brien will wake up from a night of extraordinary dreams and have a new idea for a new novel, and he'll write it, and it will be wonderful.
We can't predict what we're going to do.
But Tim O'Brien loves language, and he's a writer.
He thinks that he's exhausted his subject, but his subject actually is something much more compelling and deeper than just a surface subject.
It actually has to do his own spiritual reality.
You're saying exactly what he said.
He said, I use Vietnam to develop moral choice.
That's right.
He said Updike uses suburbia.
He said, I use Vietnam.
My books draw on my Vietnam experience because it was a defining event of my generation and my life, but I use it to express my feelings of moral choice.
And I think if you read this book, you agree.
Absolutely.
He came to Princeton and read from the new novel.
He was my, I mean, I invited him and I introduced him.
He's a wonderful writer.
I love this book, too, and it's getting, he was victimized by an unfortunate, he's funny, you know, I mean, this particular novel, he did in two different, I've got two different sets of reader's proofs on this, I mean, he kept changing it right up until the end.
I heard that, but I don't know about that.
Yeah, and he said, the first one was done, because for the ABA, they wanted to pass it around, and I think it was that one that P.W.
used for its review.
revisions subsequent to that.
I like the book, and I agree with him.
He said, every mystery doesn't have a solution.
It's much more realistic.
And he said, you know, why are we so fascinated with Amelia Earhart?
And why did they make a movie of JFK?
Because Lizzie Borden, you know?
Because there is a mystery we don't know.
That's right.
That's much more true to real life.
And, you know, it's a very powerful
Tell me, by the way, what your schedule is, if I'm running out of time.
Well, until about 10.30.
Okay.
I'm sorry to be jumping around here.
Well, we'd love to talk about vaccines.
We could talk about vaccines around.
We could.
I've got plenty of stuff, but I just want to make sure.
There was a wonderful cartoon in the New Yorker, taken 25 years ago, framed, you know, that showed a guy in a
a hammock out in his yard and his wife is looking at him, you know, what are you doing?
And basically the caption is, listen, a writer isn't always writing when he's writing for that one.
Is that basically true?
Are you always writing?
I mean, this is a 24-hour-a-day job.
I don't think so.
I'm always thinking about writing, about ideas.
I'm working on a poem now, and I started going through the poem.
in my head.
It's the sort of thing that one can do when one is traveling or in a hotel room.
So if I was over in a public garden running around early this morning, and these lines are going through my head.
But after one finishes a long novel, like what I lived for, or Tim O'Brien's novel, there's such a feeling afterward of being depleted.
And you can't think of another long novel.
You just can't think of it.
It's as if you've swum across
a turbulent river, and you've just made it to the other side, and you're lying on the bank, gasping, you're not going to think about swimming bad.
You're not going to think about swimming at all, but you might do some little things, and I think that's what we're all doing.
There was an interesting quote, again, in that Paris review piece, where you said that so much of your fiction kind of develops from dreams.
Sometimes.
Take notes, you wake up.
But those are often the hardest stories to write.
They're very hard.
I work with a dream image and how to integrate that into a realistic story.
I've actually worked harder using a dream image than I would have been if I just invented something.
So I don't really like doing that.
I worked very hard for weeks and weeks on a short story.
that was generated by a dream.
It's almost as if you're walking in the street, somebody hands you a slip of paper with an idea on it, and you look at this, and you think, I'm supposed to write a story about this?
And you have no idea how you can do it.
That's what it is to get an idea from the dream.
It's actually very difficult.
Have you ever read Lessons of the Golden?
Oh, yeah.
Years ago.
That was 62, and the concept there is that
man and woman exchange for sentences, remember?
Yeah, yeah.
I'll give you the first sentence.
The first sentence up there.
I asked her about that the other day.
It's an interesting idea.
Could you think, as you just said, you pick up something and somebody will do a story on this?
Yeah.
That would be kind of interesting.
It would be quite a challenge.
Doris Lexington was a young woman then.
She was in love with and living with a man who was a writer.
whose name I actually know.
And so they were so close, you know, emotionally in all kinds of ways, very close.
They were both writers, both obsessive.
And so to exchange the sentences between those two had a special meaning.
And maybe Doris herself has repudiated it all, you know.
That's an excellent point.
Because she's so different.
So maybe there was a sim-symbiotic kind of relationship there, where that would be possible, I guess.
But she, like many of us, as we get older, she sort of repudiates her early herself, I think.
Have you read the memoir yet?
I haven't read the memoir.
The Globe gave it a pretty nasty review, and boy, if you go by the reviews, and I've been in this business.
They're so misleading.
I was prepared to find none of the humor in this book, and the woman who reviewed it,
I'm sometimes surprised that reviewers are so thoughtful because many reviewers don't have time to read more than once.
I think most works necessitate one's reading twice to do a review or an essay.
But I'm often surprised at how sensitive reviewers are.
They pick up meanings that I put in and they get the right interpretation.
I mean, I'm less surprised when a review is careless.
It seems to me to be part of the whole genre of reviewing where one is in a hurry.
But I'm very grateful for the serious reviews.
Do the bad ones bother you?
It's hard to say.
I think that I've been made stronger by having a good or very harsh criticism when I started out as a writer.
I was writing about themes that were not
perceived as proper for a woman to write about.
Because I began writing in the early 1960s, and so there wasn't any women's relations.
There wasn't any concept of feminism.
If a woman was writing about themes of violence or masculine activity, she was perceived to have transgressed and to be writing out of her element.
So I got a lot of very, very negative reviews.
But I think, on the whole, it was probably good for me.
because I wasn't going to change my subject.
I never had changed at all.
But then I'd be more prepared.
I think, well, if I write a novel about the Duterte riots, which I did, called Them, I'll be writing about men, and I probably will get a lot of abusive reviews, but I think it's worth it.
So I'd be making more of a moral decision before I began a subject.
I didn't go into it blindly.
I would make a kind of decision ahead of time,
And I would think, well, I will make it as good a novel as I can if I'm going to write about men.
I'll try to make them complex and real.
So I think, on the whole, that's been helpful.
Interesting quote from Alexander Thrillwhite.
That's a nice book, isn't it?
Yeah.
We have the same editor.
I have a book coming out from Hope next year.
It's a book on Bibliomania on Book Mantis.
Oh, great.
But anyway, Alex mentioned these essays that he wrote, and he said, I really didn't, because they do have an unusual texture to them.
Oh, they're completely unique.
Yeah, and I said, how did that happen?
He said, you know, I didn't start them, I entered them.
It was very interesting that I tried to write the piece about him.
I always like to pick up a little something.
I said, let's see if I can enter this particular essay about, just enter the discussion.
And it's an interesting idea.
And then all of a sudden it builds around.
But if you notice, it really doesn't have a proper beginning.
No, it's meditative.
And I always find it very hard to review that book, because it's a unique book.
I think it's very beautiful.
It's a very beautiful book and very original.
And it's amazing that it hadn't really been done before, on the primary colors.
Well, Alexander Terrell is really writing about the experience of his life.
All these associations are coming out of him.
It's as if he were writing a memoir using this as a sort of tuning for it.
So it's really unique.
It's quite unique.
Just one final question.
Do you read any particular authors for pleasure?
I read almost everything for pleasure.
Last night I was sitting here, these books came in the hotel room.
I know, and there are books in there which I think have not been touched for a long time.
They basically read almost everything for pleasure and edification.
I read all the time because I see this reading.
When you first started writing, you would write novels and throw them away.
That's right.
Do you still throw stuff away?
No, I don't do that anymore.
I think I was learning how to write.
I was in college and I would write on scrap paper.
I was sort of learning like a young pianist playing for scales.
There were exercises.
I did this week's Publishers Weekly interview with Tobias Wolfe.
Oh, really?
Gosh, you're meeting all my friends.
It's a small world.
It is, but when you're interested in quality writers, there really aren't all that many either, you know?
But anyway, Toby had mentioned it.
He allowed me to use it in the piece when he was writing, writing, writing, and he would throw stuff away.
He wrote three novels when he was living out in San Francisco, and I put this in the tea.
I ran it by him first, I called him.
One of the books was bought by Ellen in England.
Nobody knows about it.
He wouldn't even tell me the title of it.
I said, why not?
He said, because I'm embarrassed by it.
And hear his own name?
We could find out what I mean.
So he doesn't list it in his credits.
He doesn't list it.
Fascinating.
The theme of preserving the past, you know, restrict the core with me, because when I'm writing a novel like this one, I am memorializing that world, and the world won't be there forever.
So, like your friend, or your friend, who stole the books, I too am trying to preserve some chunk of history.
It's the same thing.